KA6a INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS
Matti Sarvimäki, University of Helsinki
Final Exam 27.10.2008

Answer all questions in English or Finnish (or a mix of the two). Each question has an equal weight, but the subsections may carry different weights.

1. 	Suppose someone argues that the Heckscher-Ohlin model is best-suited for explaining trade between developed and developing countries, while the Krugman (1979) model is	best-suited for explaining trade among developed countries. Do you agree? Why? [Note: you should explain the key assumptions and predictions of both models]


2.	Suppose that a country wants to promote an industry that is facing foreign competition.

		a.	Use partial equilibrium analysis to compare the effects of a tariff, a quota and a subsidy for a small country. That is, explain (using a graph) who gains, who loses and what is the most efficient instrument to achieve the aim of the policy.
		
		b.	How would the analysis change if the country would be large? In particular, use partial equilibrium analysis to discuss the impact of a tariff in a two-country world. How does supply and demand elasticies affect the net effect of imposing a tariff?


3.	One of the big topics in the globalization debate concerns international migration. Use the tools and results discussed in the lectures to

		a.	Explain why international trade and migration are argued to be substitutes
		
		b.	Explain (using a graph) the expected impact of low-skilled immigration on low-skilled native wages and employment. [Note: draw the graph assuming that the economy produces only one product using capital, high-skilled and low-skilled workers, unlimited amount of capital is available from the international market at fixed price and some low-skilled native workers choose not to work if wages are too low (i.e. their labor supply is not completely inelastic)] 

		c.	A large body of empirical literature has failed to find these effects when comparing wage and employment changes in cities receiving different amount of immigration. Dicuss briefly other ways through which a local economy could absorb immigration.
